The Implicit Association Test in Market Research: Potentials and Pitfalls
Aiden P. Gregg
University of Southampton
James Klymowsky
Seven Stones
ABSTRACT
Direct measures of attitudes, such as self-reported evaluations of consumer products and brands, are vulnerable to biases that undermine their validity (i.e., social desirability, self-deception, and self-ignorance). In contrast, indirect measures, many of which rely on reaction time to index underlying associations, resist such biases. Here, one such indirect measure, the Implicit Association Test (IAT), is highlighted, and its promise and pitfalls in market research, evaluated. It is concluded that the IAT can serve as a viable and valuable methodological tool. Its diagnostic and predictive advantages, which have been empirically established, outweigh its practical and theoretical drawbacks, which can be satisfactorily addressed.	2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
   
THE IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION TEST (IAT) IN MARKET RESEARCH: GETTING TO THE HEART OF THE MIND?
When seeking to discover relevant psychological facts about respondents-for example, how consumers evaluate products or brands-researchers typically deploy a classic methodological technique: they ask them questions (Bradburn, Sudman, & Wansink, 2004). Whether done as part of an anonymous survey or a face-to-face interview, this technique certainly has its advantages. Capitalizing on the fact that human beings are verbal creatures who know much about themselves (Pinker, 2008; Tallis, 1991), and who are often willing and able to share what they know, self-report is flexible and economical means of eliciting useful information.
  Yet, like every methodological technique, self-report has its pitfalls. For one thing, subtle variations in question format are known to systematically bias the answers respondents give (Schuman & Presser, 1996). But self-report has even deeper limitations built into its fundamental nature. In particular, three commonplace reactions by respondents can compromise its validity.
   First, respondents may engage in the deception of others: they may dissimulate their true attitude. A common reason is wishing to please the researcher (social desirability bias: Fisher, 1993; King & Bruner, 2000; Steenkamp, de Jong, & Baumgartner, 2010). Second, respondents may engage in self-deception: they may fool themselves with regard to what their true attitudes are. A common reason is wishing to flatter themselves (self-enhancement bias: Greenwald, 1980; Sedikides & Gregg, 2008). Third, respondents may simply be mistaken: they may unwittingly express attitudes they do not have (Converse, 1970). A common reason is being out of touch with, or simply unable to know, their own mind (self-ignorance bias: Wilson, 2002).
   In all three cases, respondents may hold underlying or unspoken attitudes that differ from their conscious or expressed attitudes. That is, their explicit and implicit attitudes (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995) may diverge. Such a divergence is more likely to occur when (a) the topic under investigation is sensitive (Greenwald, Poehlman, Uhlmann, & Banaji, 2009; Tourangeau & Ting, 2007)-arousing concerns about how one is judged by others or judges oneself-and (b) when knowing the answer is elusive either in principle or in practice-making superficial and misleading answers more likely (Converse, 1970; Wilson, 2002).
   Such problems arise because of the direct nature of self-report enquiries. Respondents are aware of a question being asked. Hence, they can edit their answer, whether they do so intentionally (by deceiving others), unintentionally (by deceiving themselves), or unwittingly (by being mistaken). One implication is that, because what respondents say they are at least partly at odds with how they really are, the researcher's capacity to predict how respondents will behave from what they say will be impaired. Hence, a lack of correspondence between self-reports and behavior can signal, among other things, that self-reports are failing to reflect relevant facts about the psychology of the respondent.
   
588
   
Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 30(7): 588-601 (July 2013)
View this article online at wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/mar 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. DOI: 10.1002/mar.20630
   
   Mindful of this possibility, researchers have sought to circumvent the limitations of self-report. One approach has been to develop techniques designed to encourage honesty (e.g., randomized response: LensveltMulders, Hox, van der Heijden, & Maas, 2005; the "bogus-pipeline": Tourangeau, Smith, & Rasinski, 1997). Another approach has been to gather qualitative data via subjective methodologies (e.g., laddering; projective techniques; phenomenological interviews; Auerbach & Silverstein, 2003; Mariampolski, 2001). Here, the focus is on a third approach: the use of indirect measures of attitude (Dimofte, 2010; Nevid, 2010; Wittenbrink & Schwarz, 2007). Such measures are designed to be either covert, so that respondents are unaware they are being assessed, or robust, so that respondents are unable to modify their responses to them, or both. In particular, a leading indirect measure, the Implicit Association Test (IAT: Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998; Gregg, 2008; Lane, Banaji, Nosek, & Greenwald, 2007), is subjected to scrutiny with special attention to its use in market research. Suggestions are made as to how the IAT's promise might be realized and its pitfalls remedied. Before proceeding, a general theoretical framework for understanding the IAT is outlined.
TWO MENTAL SYSTEMS
There is now reasonable scientific consensus that the human mind can be divided into two general systems-one more sophisticated, the other more primitive-even if their details remain debated (Bargh & Morsella, 2008; Chaiken & Trope, 1999; Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006; Greenwald & Banaji, 1995; Kahneman, 2011; Strack, & Deutsch, 2004). One could neutrally label these two systems the foreground and background, respectively (Searle, 1992). In the mental foreground, information gets processed in a relatively conscious, slow, novel, deliberate, controlled, intentional, effortful, propositional, rule-based, reflective, rational, and logical fashion. By contrast, in the mental background, information gets processed in a relatively unconscious, fast, habitual, spontaneous, automatic, unintended, effortless, associative, similarity-based, impulsive, emotional, and intuitive fashion. The two systems are complementary: the foreground prioritizes accuracy while the background prioritizes efficiency. Nonetheless, the two systems can still operate somewhat independently. Accordingly, their outputs are sometimes in accord, sometimes at odds.
  That the mind features such a basic division is hardly a new idea. It goes back, not only to psychoanalysis (Freud, 1923), but considerably further (Whyte, 1960). What is new, however, is that the two mental systems have recently been subjected to systematic empirical investigation. There now exist numerous demonstrations of how various factors outside of awareness, as well as inside awareness, can shape attitudes and behavior (Eagleman, 2011; Hassin, Uleman, & Bargh, 2005). Two relevant illustrations must suffice. First, consider the mere exposure effect. Repeatedly encountering a neutral stimulus imparts to it a warm affective glow that increases people's liking for it, especially when they are unaware of having encountered it (Bornstein, 1989). For example, participants prefer incidentally presented banner ads that they have seen more often (Fang, Singh, & Ahluwalia, 2007). Second, people can be primed to respond in biased ways by such incidental stimuli (Bargh, 2006). For example, participants unobtrusively primed by the concepts of either "prestige" or "thrift" (by reading words connoting each in sentences, or perceiving them subliminally on a computer screen) are subsequently more likely to select, respectively, either high-status or low-priced goods (Chartrand, Huber, Shiv, & Tanner, 2008). Such findings-representative of the burgeoning field of implicit consumer cognition (Perkins, Forehand, Greenwald, & Maison, 2008; Vargas, 2008)-show how judgment and behavior can be influenced by factors working beyond the mental foreground.
   Suppose, however, one were to focus on the measurement, as opposed to the manipulation, of mental content. How might the distinction between foreground and background cognition apply? The basic premise is this: whereas direct measures, such as self-report, tend to reflect the operation of foreground processes, indirect measures, such as the IAT, tend to reflect the operation of background processes. The mapping is not perfectly one-to-one: for example, direct measures can also be shaped by unconscious factors (Dennis, 2006), and indirect measures by conscious ones (Gregg, Seibt, & Banaji, 2006). Nonetheless, because direct measures permit awareness of and control over responses, whereas indirect measures are more covert and robust, the premise is liable to hold to a first approximation.
   The upshot is that direct measures of attitude, like self-report, should be relatively susceptible to the biases of social desirability, self-deception, and selfignorance, whereas indirect measures of attitude, like the IAT, should be relatively resistant to them. For, if respondents are unaware of being assessed or are unable to control their responses, it becomes difficult or impossible from them to tell socially desirable untruths. Hence, responses on indirect measures will be potentially more trustworthy. Furthermore, if respondents' conscious responses are ignored, and only their more subconscious and automatic responses considered, the distortions of self-deception and self-ignorance will be reduced or eliminated. Hence, responses on indirect measures will be potentially more revealing. But how do indirect measures of attitude gather information about implicit attitudes in the first place?
INDIRECT MEASURES OF ATTITUDE
Indirect measures of attitude come in many shapes and sizes (Wittenbrink, & Schwarz, 2007). However, most capitalize in one way or another upon reaction time (RT). (For one alternative methodology, see Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005.) Faster RTs are used to diagnose the presence of stronger associations. Such associations-between a target object and a relevant attribute-constitute implicit attitudes (Fazio, 2007).
   In general, two uses of RT can be distinguished: adjunctive and primary. Their use is adjunctive when they are appended to a conventional direct measure of attitude. In particular, by measuring how long it takes respondents to answer to a question, further useful information can be obtained (Bassili, 2001). Moreover, given that RT can be assessed without respondents' knowledge, its adjunctive use can be legitimately described as constituting an indirect measure. For example, Fazio and Williams (1986) measured the speed with which telephone survey respondents answered questions about which U.S. presidential candidate they preferred. Respondents who responded more quickly were more likely to vote in accord with their explicit attitudes. Kokkinaki and Lunt (1997) subsequently replicated this finding for a variety of consumer products. Furthermore, RT can be appended to surveys to detect responses that are deceptive (Holden, 1998; Walczyk, Mahoney, Doverspike, & Griffith-Ross, 2009), ambivalent (van der Pligt, De Vries, Manstead, & van Harreveld, 2000), or superficial (Sellke & Mayerl, 2004), as well as to conjoint choice tasks to improve model fit (Haaijer, Kamakura, & Wedel, 2001).
   In contrast, the use of RT is primary when it is part and parcel of a standalone indirect measure of attitude that has its own special modus operandi. Again, several exist (Wittenbrink & Schwarz, 2007), but the focus here is on the IAT.
THE IAT
What is IAT Designed to Assess?
In formal terms, the IAT is designed to assess the degree to which one pair of categories, A versus B, mentally maps onto another pair of categories, X versus Y. Otherwise put, the IAT is designed to assess the degree to which the implicit associations between two category pairs, A ? X and B ? Y, are jointly stronger or weaker than the implicit associations between another two category pairs, A ? Y and B ? X.
   IAT categories may denote contrasting targets, features, or qualities. Typically, two IAT categories denote targets, and two features or qualities those targets might possess. For example, the categories Coke and Pepsi would denote two contrasting targets-leading rivals in the cola market. Cola consumers might further be expected to implicitly associate these targets with contrasting semantic features-like higher or lower price-or with contrasting evaluative qualities-like greater or lesser desirability. The former could be captured by categories such as Cheap and Expensive, and the latter by categories such as Better and Worse.
  The results of an IAT enable two categories to be ranked or scaled relative to one another. For example, suppose the IAT were used to assess the relative strength of the following pairs of implicit associations: (a) Coke ? Better and Pepsi ? Worse; and (b) Coke ? Worse and Pepsi ? Better. If the former links emerged as jointly stronger, then Coke would "beat" Pepsi. If the latter did, then Pepsi would "beat" Coke. Here, "beat" would imply an implicit preference-more positivity (and less negativity) toward one cola than toward the other, of some magnitude, at the level of implicit associations.
How Does the IAT Operate?
The IAT normally runs on computer. It is essentially a rapid-fire, binary sorting task. Respondents press either one key or another to classify items (single words or pictures) into their correct categories. They do this as quickly as they can without making errors. The time they take to classify each item is recorded, and whether or not that classification is correct.
   The items to be classified appear at the center of the screen. The categories into which they are classified appear above them, two to the left, and two to the right. Respondents press a leftward key (e.g., "q") to classify items into the former two categories, and a rightward key (e.g., "p") to classify items into the latter two.
   The key procedural feature of the IAT is this. Halfway through, the assignment of categories to keys changes. In particular, two of the four categories labels swap sides while the other two remain where they were. This creates two contrasting IAT blocks. For example, in one IAT block, Coke and Better could be assigned to "q," and Pepsi and Worse to "p." In the other block, Coke and Worse could be assigned to "q" and Pepsi and Better
to "p."
   One IAT block often proves easier to complete than the other. Given that respondents are instructed to go as quickly as they can without making errors, they go more quickly in the easier block than in the harder block, while making about the same number of occasional errors. (Respondents making too many errors can be excluded, or required to repeat a block.) Accordingly, the difference in average RT between the two blocks quantifies the degree to which one block is easier to do than the other.
   Why would one IAT block be easier to complete than the other? The logic is straightforward: when two categories are implicitly associated, their items are easier to co-classify. So if respondents find it easier to co-classify Coke + Better items and Pepsi + Worse items, than to co-classify Coke + Worse items and Pepsi + Better items, then their implicit associations for Coke ? Better and Pepsi ? Worse can be inferred to be jointly stronger than their implicit associations for Coke ? Worse and Pepsi ? Better. Moreover, the larger the difference in average RT here between the easier (or compatible) IAT block and the harder (or incompatible) IAT block, then the larger that difference in strength can be inferred to be.
Does the IAT Work?
The answer to the broader question of whether the IAT "works" depends in turn on the answers to three narrower questions. First, does the IAT assess something, whatever that is, consistently? Second, is that something distinct from what direct measures assess? Third, can the IAT predict outcomes of interest? All three questions can be answered-with a qualification or two-in the affirmative. Hence, the null hypothesis that the IAT is a fancy but useless gimmick can be rejected: there is scientific warrant for using the IAT as an indirect measure of attitudes, including in market research.
Consistent Measurement. First, IAT results are adequately reliable and reproducible. That is, if one compares parallel halves of the same IAT, or IAT results obtained on different occasions, the former correspond well (average a= 0.79; Hofmann, Gawronski, Gschwendner, & Schmitt, 2005), and the latter moderately well (average r = 0.54; Nosek, Greenwald, & Banaji, 2007). Although such values are a little lower than those typically obtained for direct measures, they should be evaluated in the light of the IAT's reliance on RT, an inherently "noisy" index. In this respect, the IAT markedly outperforms alternative RT-based indirect measures psychometrically (De Houwer & De Bruycker, 2007). Furthermore, if the IAT is lengthened trial-wise, and administered under optimal conditions, reliabilities approaching those of standard direct measures can be obtained.
Distinct Assessment. Second, scores from the IAT, and from direct measures of corresponding attitudes, do correlate, but only modestly (average r = 0.19; Hofmann et al., 2005). Arguably, this is the optimal result: a near perfect correlation would suggest the IAT was redundant with direct measures, while a near zero correlation would call the IAT's validity into question. Hence, a modest average correlation suggests that the IAT and indirect measures typically assess different aspects of people's attitudes.
  Furthermore, several factors are known to moderate the size of the explicit-implicit correlation (Hofmann et al., 2005; Nosek, 2007). For example, Smith and Nosek (2011) found that focusing on feelings-which are more background-based-as opposed to beliefs- which are more foreground-based-raised the correlation between self-reports and IAT scores. Evidently, having people "get in touch with" their underlying emotions-thereby improving their self-insight- increases the convergence between direct and indirect measures of attitude (see also Wilson, Dunn, Kraft, & Lisle, 1989). Similarly, other research (Maison, Greenwald, & Bruin, 2001) finds that IAT scores correlate better with subjective feelings about consumer products (e.g., how tasty drinks are) than with objective beliefs about them (e.g., how healthy drinks are).
   In general, however, explicit-implicit correlations should be lower when the foreground and background of people's minds are at odds over an attitude object. For, if foreground-based self-report is compromised by standard biases (i.e., social desirability, self-deception, or self-ignorance), whereas the background-based IAT is not, they are liable to go their separate ways. Thus, convergence between self-report and IAT scores can serve as a kind of "two-thumbs up": respondents can be considered less likely to be dissimulating, fooling themselves, or lacking in self-insight. In contrast, divergence between self-report and the IAT scores can serve as a kind of "red flag": there are grounds for questioning whether self-report was telling the whole story. For example, if respondents showed both an explicit and implicit preference for Coke over Pepsi, a researcher could have greater confidence in the honesty and depth of that preference. Respondents would likely be really reporting what they explicitly think, which in turn would also reflect what they implicitly link. In contrast, if respondents showed only an explicit preference for Coke over Pepsi, but an implicit preference for Pepsi over Coke, then either the honesty or the depth of that preference would be moot. Accordingly, the IAT has two useful roles: that of certifying self-report (in case social desirability might be biasing it) or of going beyond selfreport (in case either self-deception or self-ignorance might be biasing it).
Predictive Power. Third, and perhaps most crucially, the IAT predicts outcomes of consequence. A metaanalysis of relevant studies (Greenwald et al., 2009) found an overall predictive correlation of r = 0.27 for the IAT alongside one of r = 0.36 for self-report measures. (Note: both correlations are modest for several reasons, principal among them that the attitude assessed is usually general whereas the outcome predicted is usually specific; Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005.) Importantly, however, the relative predictive validity of the IAT and self-report also varies by domain. When that domain is racial prejudice-where biased responding is more likely-the IAT outperforms self-report (Greenwald et al., 2009). True, one might quibble with the results of particular studies (Blanton et al., 2009), or wonder how many failed studies remain in the "file-drawer" (Rosenthal, 1979). But the thrust of the findings is hard to contest: the IAT possesses predictive validity.
   In addition, several studies suggest that the IAT possesses incremental predictive validity, above and beyond self-report. For example, Richetin, Peruguini, Prestwich, and O'Gorman (2007) found that IATassessed attitudes toward candy and fruit predicted whether people picked a piece of candy or fruit to eat, even after taking self-reported attitudes into account. Moreover, although the pattern of incremental prediction varies (Perugini, 2005), several individual studies, reviewed below, highlight the IAT's capacity to tap into the mental background.
Unconsciousness. Among voters who explicitly classified themselves as "not yet decided" between two leading candidates in an Italian local election-that is, whose self-reports were by definition uninformative- the IAT successfully predicted which candidate voters opted for one month later (Arcuri, Castelli, Galdi, Zogmaister, & Amadori, 2008; see also Friese, Smith, Plischke, Bluemke, & Nosek, 2011). This suggests that voters had implicit dispositions, capable of shaping their behavior, of whose existence or influence they were unaware, but which the IAT could still detect. (See Galdi, Arcuri, & Gawronski, 2008, for a replication with other attitudes.) Thus, the IAT appears to "know" things about people they do not know themselves.
Habitualness. To the extent that one repeatedly engages in a behavior-so that it becomes thoughtless and automatic-background processes alone should be sufficient to sustain it. Accordingly, the IAT should predict behaviors better to the extent that they are more habitual. Conner, Perugini, O'Gorman, Ayres, and Prestwich (2007) examined how well participants' IAT-assessed and self-reported preferences for snacks versus fruits predicted both their (a) diary-recorded consumption of candy versus fruit over one week, and (b) their covertly observed choice of either a snack or fruit in the laboratory. Notably, they found the IAT alone simply predicted both outcomes. In addition, however, the more participants reported eating fruits or snacks as a habit, the better the IAT predicted them yet. Thus, the IAT appears to capture people's propensity to engage in routine behavior.
Impulsivity. Background mental processes are more efficient than foreground ones, requiring fewer cognitive resources. Hence, if people are made mentally busy-for example, by being made to memorize a long number-foreground processes will be disrupted more than background ones (Gilbert, 1991). Sure enough, under such conditions, consumer decisions become more impulsive than reflective (Vohs & Faber, 2007), and are more driven by the emotional appeal of a product than by its rational merits (Shiv & Fedorikhin, 1999, 2002; see also Maison, Greenwald, & Bruin, 2001). Dovetailing such findings, Hofmann, Rauch, and Gawronski (2007) found that, although candy consumption was normally better predicted by self-reported dietary standards, it became better predicted by IAT-assessed implicit attitudes toward candy when participants' selfregulatory capacity was first undermined by a mentally demanding task that disrupted foreground processing (see Baumeister, Sparks, Stillman, & Vohs, 2008, for a discussion of the effects of such "ego-depletion" on consumer behavior). Thus, the IAT appears to capture impulses that people usually but do not always restrain.
EXISTING APPLICATIONS OF THE IAT IN MARKET RESEARCH
In general, then, the IAT works. But how does it fare in market research? Many studies (including the abovementioned studies involving edible products) attest to its utility and promise.
   The IAT, as always, yields reliable effects. For example, Gattol, Sa¨aksj¨ arvi, and Carbon (2011) assessed¨ implicit attitudes toward a leading German automobile brand (Audi) versus two competitors (Study 1: Ford; Study 2: BMW), on six different dimensions
(safety; youthfulness; reliability; aggressiveness; ecofriendliness; innovativeness), and across three alternative item types (logos, signatures, images). IATs proved to be internally consistent (a= 0.79), and similar effects emerged across all item types (e.g., Audi always evoked more aggressive associations than Ford, and BMW more aggressive associations than Audi.).
   In addition, correlations between IAT scores and self-reports for consumer products tend to be relatively high (e.g., range typically 0.4 < r < 0.7; Brunel, Tietje, & Greenwald, 2004; Maison, Greenwald, & Bruin, 2001, 2004; Nosek, 2007), suggesting that, in this domain, implicit and explicit attitudes converge reasonably. That said, plenty of room for intriguing divergence remains. Several studies illustrate this.
   For a start, Priluck and Till (2010) found that, although both self-report and IAT scores distinguished high-equity from low-equity brands, only IAT scores distinguished between brands that were both highequity (Coke being implicitly preferred to Pepsi), or between brands that either lacked or possessed a sexual connotation (Kodak being implicitly preferred to Trojan). In the latter case, the Trojan brand may have generated uneasiness that respondents verbally repressed. Friese, Wanke, and Plessner (2006) found that, although equivalent proportions of their sample explicitly preferred either branded products or generic products, a full 85% of them implicitly preferred branded products. Perkins et al. (2008) found that Polish respondents, who generally report an explicit preference for foreign consumer products (e.g., Marlboro cigarettes), nonetheless an implicit preference for domestic ones (e.g., Sobieski cigarettes). Conversely, Dimofte, Joansoon, and Ronkainen (2008) found that respondents, whether or not they explicitly reported favoring global over local brands, nonetheless showed implicit preferences for global over local brands, associating the former more strongly with the concepts desirable and ideal.
   Furthermore, Brunel, Tietje, and Greenwald (2004) found that different groups of consumers could be meaningfully differentiated on the basis of their IAT scores. In particular, Apple Mac users, whose brand identity tends to be more pronounced, showed stronger implicit preferences than Microsoft PC users. The same researchers found, in another study, that Black and White respondents evaluated an advertisement for sports footwear very differently. Specifically, whereas Black respondents explicitly preferred advertisements featuring Black spokespersons, Whites showed no explicit preference; and whereas White respondents implicitly preferred advertisements featuring White spokespersons, Blacks showed no implicit preference. This pattern is consistent with Whites denying an underlying in-group preference, and Blacks affirming an ambivalent in-group one.
   How might such divergences between explicit and implicit product preferences toward products arise in the first place? Ratliff, Swinkels, Klerx, and Nosek (2012) recently identified one potential mechanism, which serves to illuminate the nature of brand equity in general. In Experiment 1, two branded products were introduced: A1 and B1. The former was described as superior to the latter. Unsurprisingly, respondents came to prefer A1 over B1, both on self-report scales (i.e., explicitly) and on the IAT (i.e., implicitly). Next, two more branded products were introduced: A2 and B2. These were described as being of equivalent quality. Nevertheless, generalizing from before, respondents came to prefer A2 over B2, both explicitly and implicitly. That is, prior brand-related preferences were transferred at both mental levels. Interestingly, however, the effect for explicit preferences was mediated by implicit preferences, but not vice versa, suggesting that implicit preference was the key player. The findings of Experiment 2 only reinforced this conclusion. Here, respondents first learned, as above, that A1 was superior to B1. Next, two further branded products were introduced: A3 and B3. The latter was now described as superior to the former. It turned out that, although respondents explicitly preferred A1 to B1 but B3 to A3, they still implicitly preferred both A1 to B1 and A3 to B3. Such findings are in keeping with other basic research showing that implicit preferences assessed by the IAT are "sticky", that is, harder to undo than explicit preferences (Gregg, Seibt, & Banaji, 2006).
   Predictive studies in the consumer domain also underscore the distinctive nature of what the IAT measures. Maison, Greenwald, and Bruin (2004: Study 3) assessed how often participants drank Coke versus Pepsi, their explicit preferences for one or the other (with rating scales), and their implicit preferences for one or the other (with the IAT). Whereas participants' consumption behavior covaried simply with their explicit preferences, it covaried with implicit preferences only among a particular class of participants: those who could objectively distinguish Coke and Pepsi in a blind taste test. Given that other research finds that preferences rooted in experience tend to be stronger (Fazio, Chen, McDonel, & Sherman, 1982), IAT effects may signal pronounced preferences rather than lukewarm ones.
  Equally, Friese, Wanke, and Plessner (2006) found that participants' choice of either a branded or generic product largely followed their self-reported preferences for one or the other. However, a crucial caveat again emerged. Among participants whose explicit and implicit preferences matched (i.e., "two thumbs up"), explicit preferences predicted product choice roughly 80% of the time, regardless of whether that choice was made reflectively (at participants' leisure) or impulsively (within a five-second time limit). However, among participants whose explicit and implicit preferences mismatched, although explicit preferences again predicted product choice when that choice was made reflectively, they did not do so when it was made impulsively (it now predicted it less than half the time). Thus, under conditions where background processes are liable to predominate-specifically, where a snapdecision has to be made-the IAT added predictive value. Mismatched explicit and implicit attitudes may therefore signal poorer correspondence between explicit attitudes and impulsive behavior.
   Finally, recent work has begun to explore how implicit associations can be manipulated as well as measured. Zlatevska and Spence (2012) investigated how media content could shape implicit identities. They focused on clips that featured episodes of violence. Some clips consisted of re-enactments of violent crimes. Others clips took the form of "social cause" advertisements, designed to deter antisocial behaviors by graphically depicting their ill-effects. Their dependent measure was an IAT featuring the categories Me, Not-Me, Friendly, and Slap. Respondents generally went faster in the [Me + Friendly; Not-Me + Slap] block than in the [Me + Slap; Not-Me + Friendly] block, indicating that they implicitly identified more with peace than with aggression. Nonetheless, depending on respondents' trait levels of aggressiveness, exposure to the clips shifted their implicit identifications. First, respondents low (but not high) in aggressiveness implicitly identified less with peace after viewing the violent crime clips. Second, whereas respondents low in aggressiveness implicitly identified more with peace after seeing the advertisements, respondents high in aggressiveness implicitly identified less. Thus, to the extent that shifting implicit associations have behavioral consequences, watching violent crime clips may make the peaceable somewhat less so, while watching social cause advertisements may make the aggressive even more so.
ADDRESSING CHALLENGES TO THE IAT
So far, the merits of the IAT have been highlighted. Nonetheless, the IAT is not problem-free. It possesses several practical drawbacks, and has been the subject of several theoretical critiques. Still, one can argue that the IAT's practical drawbacks, although real, can be partly remedied, while its theoretical critiques, though reasonable, can be satisfactorily rebutted.
Practical Drawbacks
Logistical Challenges. Like most indirect measures, the IAT is less readily deployed than direct measures.
It takes longer to run and requires specialized equipment. For example, one can assess explicit preferences for Coke or Pepsi in seconds using paper-and-pencil rating scales, but assessing corresponding implicit preferences with an IAT takes several minutes on computer.
   The reason is the IAT's modus operandi. It capitalizes on differences in average RT while classifying items into one of four categories under two different configurations. A minimal number of trials are therefore needed just to facilitate this modus operandi (e.g., four per configuration). Still more are needed to achieve reliable measurement, given that, on any one trial, RT is determined by many factors other than category configuration (e.g., attention levels, preceding classifications). Fortunately, these factors exert random effects ("noise") that over many trials cancel each another out to reveal genuine effects ("signal"). The price paid, however, is a more protracted IAT. Accordingly, market researchers need to be choosy about which attitudes they implicitly assess. Practically speaking, perhaps no more than a dozen full-length IATs can be administered over 30 minutes.
   Yet, despite the logistical challenges, the use of the IAT can be defended on three general grounds. First, many unwieldy diagnostic techniques are still deemed highly worthwhile. Take MRI scans. They require people to remain motionless in a claustrophobic chamber for an extended period. In contrast, physical examinations by a doctor can be accomplished briskly with the aid of hand-held instruments. Yet, when a deeper medical assessment is called for, MRI scans serves as a valuable supplement to physical examinations. Similarly, when a deeper attitudinal assessment is called for, the IAT serves as a valuable supplement to self-report.
   Second, as indirect measures go, the IAT delivers perhaps the greatest "bang for one's buck" (e.g., De Houwer & De Bruycker, 2007). Effects emerge after only a handful of trials, and individual performances can be reliably distinguished when more are added. Furthermore, market researchers can exercise the option of controlling RT-based "noise" by increasing sample size as well as trial number, if only overall effects are of interest.
   Finally, experience shows that the IAT is "well tolerated" by respondents. Most tellingly, millions have voluntarily taken IATs, often multiple times, at Web sites such as https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/ (Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002). The present authors have also developed an online IAT-administration system that is designed to maximize user-friendliness by featuring illustrated tutorials and pleasing graphics (http://www.implicitresearch.co.uk/).
Relative Assessments. The IAT has two interrelated structural limitations. First, it only permits the strength of two implicit associations to be assessed in conjunction. Second, it only permits implicit associations toward a target to be assessed relative to implicit associations toward another.
  To illustrate, consider the Coke-Pepsi/Good-Bad IAT. This IAT does not assess whether Coke alone is more implicitly associated with Good versus Bad, or whether Pepsi alone is more implicitly associated with Good versus Bad. Instead, it assesses whether the balance of Good-Bad implicit associations differs for Coke versus Pepsi. Hence, implicit attitudes toward Coke and toward Pepsi both contribute to the IAT effect and cannot be distinguished. (Note: It does no good to average RTs separately across category-specific trials. IAT effects on all trials are determined by category convuration for an entire block.) Furthermore, if a Coke- Pepsi/Good-Bad IAT yielded a significant effect, this might be because (a) one drink was implicitly liked and the other disliked, (b) both drinks were implicitly liked, only one more so, or (c) both drinks were implicitly disliked, only one more so. Large effects would make possibility (a) more probable, but moderate effects would remain ambiguous. The upshot is that the IAT is optimized for head-to-head comparisons, where the relative standing of a few key targets-often natural rivals in the marketplace-along a few key associative dimensions-such as valence, price, efficacy-needs to be established.
   To get around these structural limitations, researchers have devised novel variants of the IAT. The most straightforward is the Single-Category IAT (SC-IAT), which simply omits one of the target categories from the original (Bluemke & Friese, 2008; Karpinski & Steinman, 2006). In the consumer domain, Steinman and Karpinski (2008) successfully used the SC-IAT to assess implicit attitudes toward the Gap clothing brand. They found that it predicted both recent past visits, and expected future visits, to the Gap store. (Note: The SC-IAT was also the "IAT" used in two studies cited above where behavior was successfully and uniquely predicted: Galdi, Arcuri, and Gawronski, 2008; Hofmann, Rauch, & Gawronski, 2007.) Another IAT variant, the Simple IAT (Blanton, Jaccard, Gonzales, & Christie, 2006: Study 2), features two neutral dummy categories, such as Middle and Furniture, which are both associatively independent of one another, and of the two target categories. For example, a specific implicit association between Coke and Good could be inferred if respondents went more quickly when Coke and Good were assigned to one key and Middle and Furniture to another, than when Coke and Furniture were assigned to one key and Middle and Good to another. Yet another variant, the Go No-Go Association Test (GNAT: Nosek & Banaji, 2001), features only two categories per block (e.g., Coke + Good; Coke + Bad). Here, respondents strive to press a key ("go") if an item belongs to either category but to refrain from doing so ("no-go") if it belongs to neither category. The go versus no-go decision on each trial is made within a tight deadline (e.g., 600 ms), and the block performance index is overall accuracy rather than average RT. Although a little more taxing to complete the original IAT, the GNAT nonetheless shows predictive validity above and beyond direct measures too (Eastwick, Eagly, Finkel, & Johnson, 2011).
   Such IAT variants-which continue to be devised (e.g., Sriram & Greenwald, 2009)-offer market research several options for circumventing the structural limitations of the original IAT. Their only downside is some reduction in reliability and sensitivity, though this does not appear to preclude predictive validity (e.g., Steinman & Karpinski, 2008). Ultimately, an IAT variant that permits the implicit associations between several target concepts and several attribute concepts to be assessed at once would be a welcome addition to the growing arsenal. To this end, the present authors are seeking to develop a Multiple IAT (MIAT; Klymowsky & Gregg, 2012). Their prototype features the procedural innovation of having respondents classify multiple items on each trial, and takes advantage of recently ubiquitous touch-screen technology (e.g., on Apple's iPad).
Theoretical Critiques
Theoretical critiques of the IAT can be classified in terms of challenges to the claims inherent in the measure's three constituent names: the IAT is not implicit; it does not measure associations; and it is not a test (Fiedler, Messner, & Bluemke, 2006). Each challenge is addressed in turn. However, an overarching pro-IAT argument should be borne in mind throughout: because the IAT shows (incremental) predictive validity, these challenges are unlikely to be decisive.
Not Implicit?. Whereas self-report, being direct, is generally taken to be an index of explicit attitudes, the IAT, being indirect, is generally taken to be an index of implicit attitudes (Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998; see De Houwer, Teige-Mocigemba, Spruyt, & Moors, 2009, for a discussion of the underlying conceptual issues). As noted earlier, this mapping is not hard and fast, but a matter of degree. Both selfreport and the IAT can reflect the operation of foreground and background processes. Self-report just reflects the former more, the IAT the latter. However, explicit and implicit attitudes sometimes do correlate substantially (Nosek, 2007). In such cases, respondents cannot be said to be unaware of their implicit attitudes (Gawronski, 2009). In that sense, IAT effects are not necessarily implicit, although they often can be (Rudolph, Schroder-Ab¨ e, Sch´ utz, Gregg, & Sedikides,¨ 2008).
   Regardless, the IAT would still retain its value as a certifier of self-report. Suppose respondents consciously evaluate Coke as better to Pepsi, and that their implicit preferences tell the same story. Nonetheless, to please a market researcher from Pepsi, they pretend otherwise on a questionnaire. The divergence between self-report and IAT scores would then be a "red flag" that something was amiss.
  The implicitness of the IAT would also be open to challenge if respondents could readily fake their responses to it. Can they? The answer differs in principle and in practice. If respondents are coached about the IAT's modus operandi, and have prior experience taking IATs, then they can indeed fabricate bogus results (Fiedler & Bluemke, 2005). They do this mainly by strategically slowing down in the compatible block, thereby reducing the RT differential between blocks. Nonetheless, when respondents are simply instructed to fake their responses, they typically fail (Kim, 2003). This suggests that spontaneous faking will rarely be successful, except among more motivated respondents (Czellar, 2006). Recent research suggests that the success or failure of faking attempts is determined in complex ways by the intended direction of the fakery, the opportunity for practice, and the type of strategy pursued (Rohner, Schr¨ oder-Ab¨ e, & Sch´ utz, 2011). At all¨ events, self-report is much easier to fake than the IAT (Steffens, 2004). Moreover, RT processing algorithms can now identify deliberate fakers on the IAT up to 75% of the time (Cvencek, Greenwald, Brown, Gray, & Snowden, 2010).
   Thus, there is no reason to abandon the claim that the IAT is implicit in the sense that it is a bias-resistant measure that provides information beyond self-report.
NotAssociations?. If, on an IAT, respondents go more quickly when A and X are assigned to one key and B and Y to another, than when A and Y are assigned to one key and B and X to another, it is standardly inferred that respondents possess either or both of the automatic associations A? X and B ? Y. This inference has been criticized on two grounds: first, that the associations are not between the meanings of the categories; and second, that the associations are not respondents' own. A third criticism is that the difference in RT between compatible and incompatible blocks, rather than purely reflecting associations, is an artifact of idiosyncratic differences in RT. These are dealt with in turn below.
Salience Asymmetry. Consider an IAT featuring the targets Young and Old and the attributes Good and Bad. Respondents typically proceed more quickly in the [Young + Good; Old + Bad] block than in the [Young + Bad; Old + Good] block. This apparently shows an implicit preference for youth over age. Now consider an alternative IAT featuring the targets Young and Old and the attributes Word and Non-Word. Here, respondents still proceed more quickly in the [Young + Word; Old + Non-Word] block than in the [Young + Non-Word; Old + Word] block (Rothermund & Wentura, 2004). Yet implicit associations between youth and age, and words and non-words, are a priori highly unlikely. What is going on?
   The explanation is that the categories are mentally grouped together, not only in virtue of their shared meanings, but also in virtue of their shared noticeability. Specifically, the categories Old and Non-Word, being departures from the norm, stand out, whereas the categories Young and Word, embodying the norm, do not. Such salience asymmetries are a sufficient basis for perceiving similarities between category pairs (De Houwer, Geldof, & De Bruycker, 2005). The concern arises that standard IAT effects are driven by salience rather than by associative effects.
   The extent and seriousness of this confound is debated (Greenwald, Nosek, Banaji, & Klauer, 2005; Rothermund, Wentura, & De Houwer, 2005). However, the evidence suggests that IATs detect meaning above and beyond salience. For example, Gregg, and Lepore (2013) recently compared effects obtained on four relevant IATs: M1 [Health vs. Disease/Good vs. Bad]; M2 [Even vs. Odd/Good vs. Bad]; S1 [Health vs. Disease/Word vs. Non-Word]; and S2 [Even vs. Odd/Word vs. Non-Word]. They found, as expected, that M1 exceeded M2: respondents predictably had a stronger implicit preference for Health over Disease than for Even (numbers) over Odd (numbers). But they also found that S1 and S2-as well as being smaller overall-showed the opposite pattern: S2 exceeded S1. That is, respondents found Odd (relative to Even) more noticeable than Disease (relative to Health). Accordingly, salience asymmetry could not explain the evaluative associations obtained: if anything, it would have inhibited them. Hence, IAT effects must be more than salience asymmetry artifacts.
   Nonetheless, two pragmatic recommendations can be made for market researchers. First, unnecessary sources of salience asymmetry should be eliminated. For example, the use of unmarked versus marked terms as attribute categories (e.g., Safe vs. Unsafe) should be avoided in favor of the use of contrasting terms (e.g., Safe vs. Risky). Second, if a salience asymmetry is suspected or unavoidable, then two parallel IATs should be run, one incorporating the attribute categories of interest (e.g., Cheap vs. Expensive), and the other incorporating asymmetrically salient control categories (e.g., Word vs. Non-Word), so that effects can be compared.
Extrapersonal Associations. Research suggests that novel IAT effects can be readily created (Gregg, Seibt, & Banaji, 2006; De Houwer, Beckers, & Moors, 2007). However, some effects suggest that the implicit associations underlying them are not personally entertained by respondents, but are merely passive reflections of the outside world. Han, Olson, and Fazio (2006) had participants learn about two Pokemon characters, one obviously superior to the other. This normally induced a pronounced implicit preference on the IAT. However, if participants also overheard one child tell another that the superior character was inferior-a plainly erroneous claim-then the implicit preference was significantly reduced. One interpretation of this finding is that the IAT here reflected extrapersonal associations (Han, Czellar, Olson, & Fazio, 2010; Olson & Fazio, 2004)-impersonal links perceived to exist in the environment-rather than any personal links present in respondents' minds.
  Certainly, participants in this experiment did not endorse the (reduced) implicit associations they exhibited on the IAT. But does this imply the associations were not theirs? Perhaps the Han, Olson, and Fazio (2006) finding simply means that self-evidently false information can modify people's implicit associations, which truly belong to them. Extrapersonal associations also fail to explain many IAT effects. For example, cultural knowledge does not correlate with IAT-assessed implicit preferences independently of self-reported explicit preferences (Nosek & Hansen, 2008a).
   That said, modified versions of the IAT-which replace impersonal categories like Good and Bad with personal categories like I Like and I Don't Like- do resist manipulations of the sort featured in Han, Olson, and Fazio (2006). This suggests that personalized IATs may be somewhat more affected by foreground processes-which are required for judgments of truth and falsity (Bodenhausen & Gawronski, 2006)- than the standard IAT is (Nosek & Hansen, 2008b). In keeping with this suggestion, Czellar, Voyer, Schwob, and Luna (2009) found that the more familiar respondents were with a pair of automobile brands (Fiat and Mercedes), the greater the correlation became between self-reports and a personalized IAT, but not between self-report and a standard IAT. In other words, explicit and implicit preferences converged for the personalized IAT, but not for the standard IAT.
   Ultimately, no strong recommendation for or against the use of standard versus personalized IAT can yet be made. The practical predictive power of the latter remains unknown, so any assertions of superiority are premature.
Idiosyncratic Differences. The scores from IATs assessing entirely different preferences, such as Blacks versus Whites and Insects versus Flowers, sometimes correlate substantially (McFarland & Crouch, 2002). This can be attributed to idiosyncratic differences between respondents-most likely in cognitive skill and response speed-that partly determine performance on all IATs they complete. Such idiosyncratic differences confound the measurement of implicit associations and therefore threaten the IAT's validity.
   Fortunately, algorithms exist to control for idiosyncratic differences in RT between respondents. The disparity in average RT between compatible and incompatible blocks can then be adjusted to compensate for these idiosyncratic differences, which are estimated indirectly from RT variability across both blocks to yield a so-called D-algorithm (Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2003). Using this algorithm, unrelated IAT effects no longer correlate with one another, or with average response speed (Cai, Sriram, Greenwald, & McFarland, 2004). Thus, where market researchers wish to examine how IAT scores covary with other indices, use this algorithm, or an equally defensible variant, is advised.
Not a Test?. Formal psychological tests are not only adequately reliable and predictively valid: they are also standardized on relevant populations (Anastasi, 1996). Such standardization permits the result for any particular respondent to be interpreted in the light of the results for all other respondents. That particular result can then be legitimately declared to be relatively high or low, common or rare. For example, an IQ score of 140 on a standardized intelligence test would mean a test-taker was relatively smart, and part of an elite 1%. However, the IAT has not been standardized (Fiedler, Messner, & Bluemke, 2006). Although its core procedure is constant (ignoring the IAT variants considered earlier), its peripheral details vary across studies. Different IATs feature different sets of stimuli, more or fewer trials, the presence or absence of practice blocks, and so forth. True, the impact of methodological variables has been systematically studied, and has yielded informative findings (Nosek, Greenwald, & Banaji, 2005). It is known, for example, that IAT operates satisfactorily with as few as three items per category. However, such discoveries do not alter the fact that most IAT scores can only be interpreted relative to an individual study's sample, which may be small and purpose-specific (but see Nosek, Greenwald, & Banaji, 2005). In consequence, the meaning of any individual IAT score is imprecise. Larger scores point to stronger implicit preferences, and smaller scores to weaker ones: and the former, as noted, are more diagnostic of behavior. Still, there is no standard metric along which a score of X milliseconds can be interpreted (Blanton & Jaccard, 2006). Opinions differ on how much of a limitation this is, given that the IAT successfully predicts "consequential" outcomes (Greenwald, Nosek, & Sriram, 2006). However, the IAT is arguably not quite a test, in the formal sense.
   Nonetheless, it is possible to make rough interpretations of the meaning of individual scores by comparing them to natural or empirically established reference points. The most obvious reference point is zero-given that implicit preferences can swing in either direction. The logically contrasting reference point would then be the maximal score achievable on an IAT. This can be estimated by an IAT such as Health versus Disease/Good versus Bad, given that everyone can be presumed to greatly prefer health to disease, out of biological necessity. A typical average result for such an IAT would be a 500 ms difference in RT between blocks (Gregg & Lepore, 2013). Accordingly, a particular score on a comparable IAT could be scaled between these extremes, most conveniently, as a percentage of this maximal value (perhaps after re-expressing it in terms of the D-algorithm, to control for idiosyncratic differences). Admittedly, the intervening metric might not be strictly linear. However, the metric underlying a conventional rating scale is unlikely to be strictly linear either (Wright, 1999), and yet this simplifying assumption is commonly accepted.
  Additionally, if a market researcher wished to control still further for idiosyncratic differences, he or she might have all respondents complete a maximal IAT as a benchmark index, and use its output to interpret the output of other IATs. Another possibility would be to employ some benchmark index suited to the topic under investigation. For example, suppose a market researcher wanted to assess implicit preferences for one new beverage, Gulp, over another new beverage, Quaff. If so, he or she could usefully compare the results of the intended IAT [Gulp vs. Quaff/Good vs. Bad] to those of the benchmark IAT [Coke vs. Water/Good vs. Bad], on the grounds that the size of the implicit preference for an iconic beverage over everyday water would define the relevant range.
   Ultimately, the arbitrariness inherent IAT scores cannot be completely eliminated. However, this does not mean that a market researcher cannot make rough educated guesses about the significance of IAT scores of particular magnitudes.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, the IAT was evaluated with special reference to market research. Its purpose as an indirect measure was examined, its basis in psychological theory outlined, its underlying modus operandi explained, its psychometric merits highlighted, its existing applications in market research listed, its logistical and theoretical pitfalls reviewed, and some recommendations made to remedy those pitfalls. It is reasonable to conclude the IAT is a viable and valuable tool, backed by scientific evidence, which can offer unique diagnostic and predictive advantages to a market researcher.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of attitudes on behavior. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anastasi, A. (1996). Psychological testing (7th Ed.). New York: Macmillian.
Arcuri, L., Castelli, L., Galdi, S., Zogmaister, C., & Amadori, A. (2008). Predicting the vote: Implicit attitudes as predictors of the future behavior of the decided and undecided voters. Political Psychology, 29, 369-387.
Auerbach, C. F., & Silverstein, L. B. (2003). Qualitative data: An introduction to coding and analysis. New York: New York University Press.
Bargh, J. A. (2006). What have we been priming all these years? On the development, mechanisms, and ecology of nonconscious social behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 147-168.
Bargh, J. A., & Morsella, E. (2008). The unconscious mind. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 73-79.
Bassili, J. N. (2001). Cognitive indices of social information processing. In A. Tesser & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social psychology: Intraindividual processes (Vol. 1, pp. 68-88). Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Baumeister, R. F., Sparks, E. A., Stillman, T. F., & Vohs, K. D. (2008). Free will in consumer behavior: Self-control, ego depletion, and choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 18, 4-13.
Blanton, H., & Jaccard, J. (2006). Arbitrary metrics in psychology. American Psychologist, 61, 27-41.
Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., Gonzales, P., & Christie, C. (2006). Decoding the Implicit Association Test: Implications for criterion prediction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 192-212.
Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., Klick, J., Mellers, B., Mitchell, G., & Tetlock, P. (2009). Strong claims and weak evidence: Reassessing the predictive validity of the race IAT. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 567-582.
Bluemke, M., & Friese, M. (2008). Reliability and validity of the Single-Target IAT (ST-IAT): Assessing automatic affect towards multiple attitude objects. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38, 977-997.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968-1987. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 265-289.
Bradburn, N. M., Sudman, S., & Wansink, B. (2004). Asking auestions: The definitive guide to questionnaire design- for market research, political polls, and social and health questionnaires (Rev. Ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brunel, F. F., Tietje, B. C., & Greenwald, A. G. (2004). Is the Implicit Association Test a valid and valuable measure of implicit consumer social cognition. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14, 385-404.
Cai, H., Sriram, N., Greenwald, A. G., & McFarland, S. G. (2004). The Implicit Association Test's D measure can minimize a cognitive skill confound: Comment on McFarland and Crouch (2002). Social Cognition, 22, 673-684.
Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (1999). Dual process theories in social psychology. New York: Guilford Press.
Chartrand, T. L., Huber, J., Shiv, B., & Tanner, R. J. (2008). Nonconscious goals and consumer choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 189-201.
Conner, M., Perugini, M., O'Gorman, R, Ayres, K., & Prestwich, A. (2007). Relations between implicit and explicit measures of attitudes and measures of behavior: Evidence of moderation by individual difference variables. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1727-1740.
Converse, P. E. (1970). Attitudes and nonattitudes: Continuation of a dialogue. In E. R. Tufte (Ed.), The quantitative analysis of social problems. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Cvencek, D., Greenwald, A. G., Brown, A. S., Gray, N. S., & Snowden, R. J. (2010). Faking of the Implicit Association Test is statistically detectable and partly correctable. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 32, 302-314.
Czellar, S. (2006). Self-presentational effects in the Implicit Association Test. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 16, 92- 100.
Czellar, S., Voyer, B., Schwob, A., & Luna, D. (2009). Whence brand evaluations? Investigating the relevance of personal and extrapersonal associations in brand attitudes. Advances in Consumer Research, 36, 681-682.
De Houwer, J., & De Bruycker, E. (2007). The Implicit Association Test outperforms the Extrinsic Affective Simon Task as an implicit measure of inter-individual differences in attitudes. British Journal of Social Psychology, 46, 401-421.
De Houwer, J., Geldof, T., & De Bruycker, E. (2005). The Implicit Association Test as a general measure of similarity. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 228- 239.
De Houwer, J., Beckers, T., & Moors, A. (2007). Novel attitudes can be faked on the Implicit Association Test. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 972-978.
De Houwer, J., Teige-Mocigemba, S., Spruyt, A., & Moors, A. (2009). Implicit measures: A normative analysis and review. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 347-368.
Dennis, D. (2006). Using supraliminal priming to manipulate reports of sensitive behaviors in surveys. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Loyola University, Chicago.
Dimofte, C. V. (2010). Implicit measures of consumer cognition: A review. Psychology & Marketing, 27, 921-937.
Dimofte, C. V., Joansoon, J. K., & Ronkainen, I. A. (2008). Spanning the globe: Win over the anti-globals. Marketing Management, 17, 40-43.
Eagleman, D. (2011). Incognito: The secret lives of the brain. New York: Pantheon Books.
Eastwick, P. W., Eagly, A. H., Finkel, E. J., & Johnson, S. E. (2011). Implicit and explicit preferences for physical attractiveness in a romantic partner: A double dissociation in predictive validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 993-1011.
Fang, X., Singh, S., & Ahluwalia, R. (2007). An examination of different explanations for the mere exposure effect. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 9-103.
Fazio, R. H. (2007). Attitudes as object-evaluation associations of varying strength. Social Cognition, 25, 603-637.
Fazio, R. H., & Williams, C. J. (1986). Attitude accessibility as a moderator of the attitude-perception and attitudebehavior relations: An investigation of the 1984 presidential election. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 505-514.
Fazio, R. H., Chen, J., McDonel, E. C., & Sherman, S. J. (1982). Attitude accessibility, attitude-behavior consistency and the strength of the object-evaluation association. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 18, 339-357.
Fiedler, K., & Bluemke, M. (2005). Faking the IAT: Aided and unaided response control on the implicit association tests. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 27, 307-316.
Fiedler, K., Messner, C., & Bluemke, M. (2006). Unresolved problems with the "I", the "A", and the "T": A logical and psychometric critique of the Implicit Association Test (IAT). European Review of Social Psychology, 17, 74-147.
Fisher, R. J. (1993). Social desirability bias and the value of indirect questioning. Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 303-315.
Freud, S. (1923). The ego and the Id. In J. Strachey (Ed.), The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. XIX). London: Hogarth Press.
Friese, M., Wanke, M., & Plessner, H. (2006). Implicit consumer preferences and their influence on product choice. Psychology & Marketing, 23, 727-740.
Friese, M., Smith, C. T., Plischke, T., Bluemke, M., & Nosek, B. A. (2011). Do implicit attitudes predict actual voting behavior particularly for undecided voters? Unpublished manuscript.
Galdi, S., Arcuri, L., & Gawronski, B. (2008). Automatic mental associations predict future choices of undecided decision-makers. Science, 321, 1100-1102.
Gattol, V., Sa¨aksj¨ arvi, M. C., & Carbon, C. C. (2011). Extend-¨ ing the Implicit Association Test (IAT): Assessing consumer attitudes based on multi-dimensional implicit associations. Plos ONE, 6, e15849.
Gawronski, B. (2009). Ten frequently asked questions about implicit measures and their frequently supposed, but not entirely correct answers. Canadian Psychology, 50, 141- 150.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative and propositional processes in evaluation: An integrative review of implicit and explicit attitude change. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 692-731.
Gilbert, D. T. (1991). How mental systems believe. American Psychologist, 46, 107-119.
Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal history. American Psychologist, 35, 603-618.
Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1995). Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychological Review, 102, 4-27.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. K. L. (1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1464-1480.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 197-216.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Klauer, K. C. (2005). Validity of the salience asymmetry interpretation of the IAT: Comment on Rothermund and Wentura (2004). Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 420- 425.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Sriram, N. (2006). Consequential validity of the Implicit Association Test: Comment on the article by Blanton and Jaccard. American Psychologist, 61, 56-61.
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E., & Banaji, M. R. (2009). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 17-41.
Gregg, A. P. (2008). The Implicit Association Test: Oracle of the unconscious or deceiver of the unwitting? The Psychologist, 21, 762-767.
Gregg, A. P., Seibt, B., & Banaji, M. A. (2006). Easier done than undone: Asymmetry in the malleability of automatic preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 1-20.
Gregg, A. P., & Lepore, L. (2013). "It Don't Matter if you're Black or White": Putting the Race IAT into evaluative context. Unpublished manuscript, University of Southampton.
Haaijer, R, Kamakura, W. A., & Wedel, M. (2001). Response latencies in the analysis of conjoint choice experiments. Journal of Marketing Research, 37, 376-382.
Han, H. A., Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2006). The influence of experimentally-created extrapersonal associations on the Implicit Association Test. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 259-272.
Han, H. A., Czellar, S., Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2010). Malleability of attitudes or malleability of the IAT? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 286-298.
Hassin, R. R. Uleman, J. S., and Bargh, J. A. (2005). The new unconscious. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hofmann, W., Gawronski, B., Gschwendner, T., Le, H., & Schmitt, M. (2005). A meta-analysis on the correlation between the Implicit Association Test and explicit self-report measures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1369-1385.
Hofmann, W., Rauch, W., & Gawronski, B. (2007). And deplete us not into temptation: Automatic attitudes, dietary restraint, and self-regulatory resources as determinants of eating behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 497-504.
Holden, R. R. (1998). Detecting fakers on a personnel test: Response latencies versus a standard validity scale. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 13, 387-398.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
Karpinski, A., & Steinman, R. B. (2006). The Single Category Implicit Association Test as a measure of implicit social cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 16-32.
Kim, D. (2003). Voluntary controllability of the Implicit Association Test (IAT). Social Psychology Quarterly, 66, 83-96.
King, M., & Bruner, G. (2000). Social desirability bias: A neglected aspect of validity testing. Psychology & Marketing, 17, 79-103.
Klymowsky, J., & Gregg, A. P. (2012). The flexible Implicit Association Test. White Paper, Seven Stones, London, UK.
Kokkinaki, F., & Lunt, P. (1997). Attitude accessibility as a function of involvement with the attitude object: Moderators of the attitude-behaviour relationship. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 497-409.
Lane, K. A., Banaji, M. R., Nosek, B. A., & Greenwald, A. G. (2007). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: IV: Procedures and validity. In B. Wittenbrink & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Implicit measures of attitudes: Procedures and controversies (pp. 59-102). New York: Guilford Press.
Lensvelt-Mulders, G. J. L. M., Hox, J., van der Heijden, P. G. M., & Maas, C. J. M. (2005). Meta-analysis of randomized response research. Sociological Methods and Research, 33, 319-348.
Maison, D., Greenwald, A. G., & Bruin, R. (2001). The Implicit Association Test as a measure of implicit consumer attitudes. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 2, 61-79.
Maison, D., Greenwald, A. G., & Bruin, R. H. (2004). Predictive validity of the Implicit Association Test in studies of brands, consumer attitudes, and behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14, 405-415.
Mariampolski, H. (2001). Qualitative market research: A comprehensive guide. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
McFarland, S. G., & Crouch, Z. (2002). A cognitive skill confound on the Implicit Association Test. Social Cognition, 20, 483-510.
Nevid, J. S. (2010). Implicit measures of consumer response: The search for the Holy Grail of marketing research. Introduction to Special Issue. Psychology & Marketing, 27, 913-920.
Nosek, B. A. (2007). Implicit-explicit relations. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 65-69.
Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2001). The go/no-go association task. Social Cognition, 19, 625-666.
Nosek, B. A., & Hansen, J. J. (2008a). The associations in our heads belong to us: Searching for attitudes and knowledge in implicit evaluation. Cognition and Emotion, 22, 553-594.
Nosek, B. A., & Hansen, J. J. (2008b). Personalizing the Implicit Association Test increases explicit evaluation of the target concepts. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 25, 226-236.
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Harvesting implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a demonstration website. Group Dynamics, 6, 101-115.
Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: II Method variables and construct validity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 166-180.
Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (2007). The Implicit Association Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual review. In J. A. Bargh (Ed.), Automatic processes in social thinking and behavior (pp. 265-292). New York: Psychology Press.
Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2004). Reducing the influence of extrapersonal associations on the Implicit Association Test:
Personalizing the IAT. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 653-667.
Payne, B. K., Cheng, C. M., Govorun, O., & Stewart, B. D. (2005). An inkblot for attitudes: Affect misattribution as implicit measurement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 277-293.
Perkins, A., Forehand, M., Greenwald, A. G., & Maison, D. (2008). The influence of implicit social cognition on consumer behavior: Measuring the non-conscious. In C. Haugtvedt, P. Herr, & F. Kardes (Eds.), Handbook of consumer psychology (pp. 461-475). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Perugini, M. (2005). Predictive models of implicit and explicit attitudes. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 29-45.
Pinker, S. (2008). The stuff of thought: Language as a window into human nature. Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Priluck, R., & Till, B. D. (2010). Comparing a customer-based brand equity scale with the Implicit Association Test in examining consumer responses to brands. Journal of Product Brand Management, 17, 413-428.
Ratliff, K. A., Swinkels, B. A. P., Klerx, K., & Nosek, B. A. (2012). Does one bad apple (juice) spoil the bunch? Implicit attitudes toward one product transfer to other products by the same brand. Psychology & Marketing, 29, 531-540.
Richetin, J., Perugini, M., Prestwich, A., & O'Gorman, R. (2007). The IAT as a predictor of spontaneous food choice: The case of fruits versus snacks. International Journal of Psychology, 42, 166-173.
Rohner, J., Schr¨ oder-Ab¨ e, & Sch´ utz, A. (2011). Exaggeration¨ is harder than understatement, but practice makes perfect! Faking success in the IAT. Experimental Psychology, 58,464-472.
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The "file drawer problem" and tolerance for null results. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 838-641.
Rothermund, K., & Wentura, D. (2004). Underlying processes in the Implicit Association Test (IAT): Dissociating salience from associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 139-165.
Rothermund, K., Wentura, D., & De Houwer, J. (2005). Validity of the salience asymmetry account of the Implicit Association Test: Reply to Greenwald, Nosek, Banaji, and Klauer (2005). Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 426-430.
Rudolph, A., Schroder-Ab¨ e, M., Sch´ utz, A., Gregg, A. P., &¨ Sedikides, C. (2008). Through a glass, less darkly? Reassessing convergent and discriminant validity in measures of implicit self-esteem. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 24, 273-281.
Schuman, H., & Presser, S. (1996). Questions and answers in attitude surveys: Experiments on question form, wording, and context. New York: Academic Press. Searle, J. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sedikides, C., & Gregg, A. P. (2008). Self-enhancement: Food for thought. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 102- 116.
Sellke, P., & Mayerl, J. (2004). How long does it take to be ignorant? Measuring nonattitudes with response latencies in surveys. In C. van Dijkum, J. Blasius, & B. van Hilton (Eds.), Recent developments and applications in social research methodology. Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Logic and Methodology. Amsterdam: SISWO.
Shiv, B., & Fedorikhin, A. (1999). Heart and mind in conflict: Interplay of affect and cognition in consumer decision making. Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 278-282.
Shiv, B., & Fedorikhin, A. (2002). Spontaneous versus controlled influences of stimulus-based affect on choice behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87, 342-370.
Smith, C. T., & Nosek, B. A. (2011). Affective focus increases the concordance between implicit and explicit attitudes. Social Psychology, 42, 300-313.
Sriram, N., & Greenwald, A. G. (2009). The brief Implicit Association Test. Experimental Psychology, 56, 283-294.
Steenkamp,	J.	E.	M.,	de	Jong,	M.	G.,	&	Baumgartner,
H. (2010). Socially desirable response tendencies in survey research. Journal of Marketing Research, 47, 199- 214.
Steffens, M. C. (2004). Is the Implicit Association Test immune to faking? Experimental Psychology, 51, 165- 179.
Steinman, R. B., & Karpinski, A. (2008). The single category Implicit Association Test (SC-IAT) as a measure of implicit consumer attitudes. European Journal of Social Sciences, 7, 32-42.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 220-247.
Tallis, R. (1991). The explicit animal: A defence of human consciousness. London: Macmillan.
Tourangeau, R., & Ting, Y. (2007). Sensitive questions in surveys. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 859-883.
Tourangeau, R., Smith, T. W., & Rasinski, K. (1997). Motivation to report sensitive behaviors in surveys: Evidence from a bogus pipeline experiment. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27, 209-222.
van der Pligt, J., De Vries, N. J., Manstead, A. S. R., & van Harreveld, F. (2000). The importance of being selective: Weighing the role of attribute importance in attitudinal judgment. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 135-200.
Vargas, P. T. (2008). Implicit consumer cognition. In F. Kardes, C. Haugdtvedt, & P. Herr (Eds.), Handbook of consumer psychology (pp. 477-503). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vohs, K. D., & Faber, R. J. (2007). Spent resources: Selfregulatory resource availability affects impulse buying. Journal of Consumer Research, 33, 537-547.
Walczyk, J. J., Mahoney, K. T., Doverspike, D., & GriffithRoss, D. A. (2009). Cognitive lie detection: Response time and consistency of answers as cues to deception. Journal of Business Psychology, 24, 33-49.
Whyte, L. (1960). The unconscious before Freud. New York: Basic Books.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D., Dunn, D. S., Kraft, D., & Lisle, D. J. (1989). Introspection, attitude change, and attitude-behavior consistency: The disruptive effects of explaining why we feel the way we do. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 287-343). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Wittenbrink, B. & Schwarz, N. (Eds.) (2007). Implicit measures of attitudes. New York: Guilford Press.
Wright, B. D. (1999). Fundamental measurement for psychology. In S. E. Embretson and S. L. Hershberger (Eds.), The new rules of measurement: What every psychologist and educator should know (pp. 65-104). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zlatevska, N. & Spence, M. T. (2012). Do violent social cause advertisements promote social change. Psychology & Marketing, 29, 322-333.
Correspondence regarding this article should be sent to: Dr. Aiden P. Gregg, Psychology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, England, U.K. (aiden@soton.ac.uk).
590	GREGG AND KLYMOWSKY
	Psychology and Marketing	DOI: 10.1002/mar
   
IAT IN MARKET RESEARCH	589
Psychology and Marketing	DOI: 10.1002/mar
   

   
